[Doc] Set up the basis of Taichi specification (#4603)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/lang/articles/reference.md

---
sidebar_position: 9998
---

# Language Reference

This article describes the syntax and semantics of the Taichi programming
language.

**To users**: If you have gone through user tutorials and still feel uncertain

> about your program behavior, then you are coming to the correct place. If you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about your program behavior, then you are in the right place. If you
```

Anything unspecified in this article is subject to change, so you should not
rely on it in your programs.

**To contributors**: This article specifies what the language *should* be. That
is, you should try to match the implementation of the Taichi compiler with this
article. You can clearly determine a certain behavior is *correct*, *buggy*, or
*undefined* from this article.

## Introduction

Taichi is a domain-specific language embedded in Python.
[Kernels and functions](basic/syntax.md) clearly defines the boundary between
the Taichi language and the Python language - code in the Taichi scope is
treated as the former, while code in the Python scope is treated as the latter.
It should be emphasized that this article is about *the Taichi language*.

That said, because Taichi is embedded in Python, the syntax of Taichi is a
subset of that of Python. To make life easier, this article is modeled after
the [Python language reference](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/). The
[notation](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/introduction.html#notation) and
[lexical analysis](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html)

> parts exactly follow Python, so familiarize yourself with them if you are new

Reviewer: Let's tune down a bit..

```suggestion
parts exactly follow Python, please familiarize yourself with them if they seem new
```

to them.

## Basic concepts

> Before detailing syntax and semantics in the next few chapters, many important

Reviewer: many basic but important concepts and general evaluation principles specific to Taichi are listed here.

basic concepts and general evaluation principles unique to Taichi are
introduced here.

### Values and types

> Like other programming languages, each expression in Taichi will be evaluated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like many other programming languages, each expression in Taichi will be evaluated
```

to a value, and each value has a type. Because Taichi provides easy interaction
with Python and [meta-programming](advanced/meta.md) support, there are
actually two kinds of evaluation: *compile-time evaluation* and *runtime
evaluation*. There are also two kinds of values: *Python values* and *Taichi
values*.

:::note
For readers familiar with programming language terms, such behavior is inspired
by [multi-stage programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-stage_programming)
or [partial evaluation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_evaluation).
:::

A Python value is simply a
[Python object](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html),
which directly comes from the following sources:

> - Free variables

Reviewer: nit: I would put `literals` first because that is the simplest

- Arguments passed via `ti.template()`
- Literals

Furthermore, as long as all the operands of an operation are Python values,

> compile-time evaluation will take place and a result Python value will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compile-time evaluation will take place, producing a result Python value.
```

This needs update. If I call `foo(x)`, where both `foo()` and `x` are Python values (i.e., `foo()` is not a Taichi function), all operands are Python value, but I still need to use it inside `ti.static`?

Author: No, you can directly use it.

produced. For meta-programming purposes, Taichi provides an advanced
environment for compile-time evaluation: `ti.static()`, where more operations
are supported.

> A Python value only exists at compile time. After compile-time evaluation, all

Reviewer: I feel like it's more like "transformed into Taichi values at JIT compile time"?

Author: I understand your point. The accurate way to say this should be "transformed into literals of Taichi AST". However, introducing Taichi AST here may complicate things even further. My purpose is to let users directly think about the final execution behavior based on their source code, and the actual Taichi value is indeed created at runtime.

the remaining expressions will be evaluated to Taichi values at runtime.

> A Taichi value has a Taichi type, which is one of the following:

Reviewer: I think we need to revamp our type system. At the end of the day, we can say:

which is one of the following:

* A primitive type
* A compound type
* An Ndarray
* ...

You can find more details in Type System.

WDYT?

Author: I agree. They should be described in a unified way. My writing here is limited by the current situation :-(
